---
layout: post
title: "Usable Encryption & End-User Control"
date: 2020-05-12 12:00:00 -0500
---
**Week 6 Reflection**

One of the most hilarious things that has been pointed out in any paper I’ve read is “If your adversary is the Mossad, YOU’RE
GONNA DIE AND THERE’S NOTHING THAT YOU CAN DO ABOUT IT.” Throughout James Mickens’ paper he uses a great combination of humor
and technical knowledge to show the reader how simple the veil of security really is. He outs the majority of the security 
world for not following what they preach, which is true for most of us. It is all put in an almost satirical comedic sense 
of “we’re all going to die eventually so just do the best you can for now” throughout much of his paper. 

Connecting this thought and notion to our real life ordeals, there is an obvious connect between where we try and act like 
security professionals and know what we’re doing, and the “do as I say not as I do” mentality. Time and time again it is 
shown how what we try and get others to use these stupidly complex passwords for different websites, when practically 
speaking just using a couple secure passwords and not clicking on malicious email links will keep you safe 99.99% of the time. 
Unless you have someone specifically targeting you, you are at no real threat as long as you aren’t actively putting yourself 
at risk. 

Contrary to the points and ideas that is brought up by James, the paper on Why Johnny Can’t Encrypt takes a different 
approach to how everyday people should go about using security practices. It goes over PGP and how complex it is for 
the basic user to configure, and well, use. PGP 5.0 is definitely more complex in terms of setting up than just using long 
passwords. Having the basic user set this up and expecting them to do it correctly is a high task to ask of them. There are 
so many different complexities that it’s hard to use for the normal person. Having to be able to transfer keys between 
systems for a user without any security knowledge would be near impossible, so it would be hard to expect a standard user to 
do this. 

Throughout these papers one of the overarching ideas is trying to achieve useable security for everyone to use, not just the 
die-hard security professionals. You can’t start going to the moon and expect the people who barely know how to walk join along.
Security is a team effort, you have to make sure that everyone is doing it no matter how basic or complex it might be. If you 
have one person not doing it then they’re your weakest link. A strong security posture only holds true if everyone can achieve 
it. That’s what I believe the biggest take away from this weeks readings is. Don’t over complicate things so that the basic 
user can’t understand it. Make sure that the solutions that you are creating are realistic and achievable for your target 
audience. 
