---
layout: post
title: "Trust in Cryptocurrency"
date: 2020-06-08 12:00:00 -0500
---
**Case Study**

**Trust and Anonymity in Cryptocurrency**

Niko Fricker
Cyber Security, Western Washington University, Bellingham, WA, USA, nikofricker@hotmail.com

Abstract
One of the appeals of using cryptocurrencies over regular money is the fact that most people believe it is completely anonymous. It is thought that this form of money is untraceable, that it can be used for any sort of transaction without the threat of being found or having it traced back to you. This idea has led to the currency being used for malicious activities such as money laundering, payment of drugs, guns, and illegal videos. With a large web of criminal activity being siphoned into using cryptocurrency as a form of staying under the radar and away from the authorities it’s believed that they provide a layer of anonymity for the buyer and seller. It is thought to be non-identifiable, untraceable, and leaves them unreachable from the authorities. But with the idea of these coins being so anonymous and hard to track, how can trust be established for the user. In this paper I will discuss how trust is formed within a coin and how that trust directly correlates to its value. (maybe go over how trust and anonymity are intertwined if I need more)

Keywords
Cryptocurrency, Privacy, Anonymity, Trust

1.	Introduction
“Cryptocurrency” is a term that has been coined for any form of decentralized currency that is hosted purely online. There is no physical form of the currency, no tangible way to hold it or see what it is. It exists entirely through the transactions of blockchain ciphers that machines encrypt and decrypt. Somehow this currency has become more and more relevant over the years, having developed all sorts of different applications over time. Although made with good intentions, these coins quickly became the main vector for malicious activities. Often times they’re the currency of choice for ransoms, smuggling, money laundering, buying guns, and more [1]. They leave a very dark and mysterious trail behind them wherever they are found. 

2.	Brief History of Crypto
Before moving further along with the security and privacy that different types of coins may provide, we must first look at why these coins were created in the first place. The 2008 recession took a toll on many peoples’ lives and impacted their trust. Big banks and government had failed the people which left them to pick up the slack of what was left. This distrust in the government and big banks was the first spark that started the movement of cryptocurrency [4]. Having a decentralized currency would mean that there wasn’t the risk of it all going down in one fell swoop. This would lead towards the creation of Bitcoin, Ethereum, Monero, and more. 

Along with this distrust in centralized powers, having a currency that wasn’t at risk of immediate seizure by one entity was a big bonus. This disconnect from any central power allowed these groups to use this cryptocurrency in the same way Swiss banks are used: to store money in off shore accounts that are untouchable by any form of government. With them being decentralized in nature, it also allowed for them to be withdrawn almost immediately from anywhere in the world giving groups nearly instantaneous access to these funds regardless of location. Giving the user both the freedom of being able to use it worldwide while also providing the appeal of anonymity that cash would provide. 

2.1	 What is Cryptocurrency
Cryptocurrency has four main defining principles. In order to qualify as a cryptocurrency, it must be decentralized. Centralized powers such as banks have been trying to create their own types of cryptocurrencies. These do not fall under the traditional idea of a cryptocurrency though due to the single point of failure that this would provide. The idea of using cryptocurrencies was spawned out of the basis of not having a centralized power control the money and transactions that occurred.  Cryptocurrencies must also provide strong security behind transactions, as seen with their blockchain algorithms. It must have a digital ledger of transactions to provide immutability and trust. Finally, it must provide the user a sense of secrecy in their transactions by hiding the users’ identity by giving it a pseudonymous identifier instead. Without these four pillars, it would not be considered a cryptocurrency at all.

2.2	The Pillars of Crypto
Breaking each one of these requirements down shows how the fundamentals of these currencies work and why they’re able to hold value. Starting off with the decentralization of cryptocurrencies we can see that the true value lies behind functionality, helpfulness, and reliability. Functionality refers to the belief that a specific technology has the capability, functions, and features, to do the required task (e.g., software that translates texts from one language to another). Helpfulness is described as the belief that technology provides adequate and responsive assistance to users via their help attributes (e.g., software that, besides translating texts from one language to another at all times, provides guidance on how to enable the speech recognition attribute). Then we have the reliability that represents the integrity aspect of trust in technology. Reliability can be defined as the property that enables technology to operate consistently over a period of time (e.g., software that translates texts from one language to another at all times) [2]. The decentralized currency has no entity binding it to one group or government. Along with this, having a decentralized currency such as a cryptocurrency gives many other advantages which was one of the key points in the creation of cryptocurrency. This model allows any user to act as a payment processor lending their hardware to the encryption and decryption process of these coins thus allowing users to aid in the process of their chosen coins. It also makes it so that information can’t be directly seized by authority figures, so a government can’t come and take control of all of your funds. Along with this, you can instantly access these funds anywhere in the world and transfer them into whatever currency you need with no penalties. But the main appeal is veil of privacy and anonymity that comes with using these coins rather than a centralized currency while still being able to be used anywhere, much unlike any fiat counterpart. There is no common method of tracing who the buyer and seller are in these transactions, although it is still possible for some groups to break through this veil. 

Focusing from the main benefits of decentralization to the strong cryptography behind these coins, we can see the process that goes behind securing each transaction that occurs. There is a complex set of actions that happen each time a transaction a made. The first step in creating one of these transactions is for the buyer to send a transaction request to the servers hosting their coin. From there, the request is then broadcasted to a peer-to-peer network that consists of nodes that are set up to then start the encryption process. The network of nodes then uses known algorithms to validate transactions and user status, verify the transaction, then add it to a block with other transactions. This block is then encrypted again, verified, and then recorded into the ledger [3]. The new block is then added to existing blockchain where it will be permanent and unalterable. Finally, the transaction is finished. For the majority of blockchain cryptocurrencies, this is how they function and provide the user with a foundation of trust and anonymity. Although in the interest of user security and privacy other coins such as Monero, Dash, Zcash, and Verge will sacrifice their availability and time it takes to process a payment for greater user anonymity. These coins each have their own unique way of keeping transactions even more secure then Bitcoin and other basic blockchain coins. 

The aforementioned ledger keeps track of all information that occurs in a given coin’s transactions. It records all transactions and is publicly viewable. This ledger cannot be altered or tampered with, so it acts as a permanent record for everything that happens within a given blockchain. The reasoning behind this is quite simple; it creates trust. You can see what happens. You can see who requested what, and who the coins move between. Now for most people this isn’t viewable at all and their main identities are still hidden but keep this in mind for later on. This paper trail provides a layer of stability for the coin. It proves each transaction and prevents duplication from happening as well. 
This all gives way to the layer of secrecy and anonymity that so many desire from cryptocurrencies. The shroud of secrecy that it creates is enough for most, but it doesn’t mean that the user is completely hidden from prying eyes. 

3.	Trust in Crypto
There is an inherent trust that must lie within these coins for them to contain any value at all. Without trust, these coins are valueless. Trust provides a way to prove authenticity of a party using the coin. It makes the user base greater and allows for the growth of the coin. Throughout cryptocurrencies there are many different levels of trust that must first be established for any transaction to be successful. These layers of trust cover many different sections of the transaction of a coin. They can be found in the blockchain used to encrypt its information, the collective governance process of the coin, the wallets and platforms the coin is traded on, and the initial coin offerings that are proposed. There is no real order that is established by these coins, but rather a necessity for a coin to have each layer. If a coin can truly achieve each different aspect of trust it will grow trust in its supporters, gain value over time, and prevail through the hundreds of coins that are created every year. 

3.1	Layers of Trust
Without first establishing trust in the blockchain being used, you have nothing. The blockchain along with the algorithm that governs it is the driving force behind the security of a coin and the privacy of the user. For instance, with Bitcoin it uses the SHA256 algorithm to encrypt and create the blockchain that goes along with a transaction. This means that unless someone can break the SHA256 hash that your transaction will be completely private.

Once you’ve achieved this step, you must then establish trust in the collective governance process of a coin. Collective governance is the process of making clearly defined boundaries actively auditing monitors, figuring out conflict, and creating sanctions that is done naturally by the community that buys into a given coin. This process can either build trust in the community (thus build value in the coin), or it can split the community and break trust. This process of splitting in the community is known as a hard fork. When a hard fork happens, it will split the blockchain of the coin and create a new blockchain based off of it. This can be seen with the Bitcoin hard fork of August 2017. Bitcoin split and became both Bitcoin and Bitcoin Cash which eroded some of the value of Bitcoin and divided its community base. 

After you have moved past this step of trust, you then have to make sure that you are using a platform that can be trusted. It is especially hard to create trust in these factors since they have basically become a centralized hub for exchanging these coins. Unlike banks and other common centralized powers, these platforms have no rules, no regulations, and nothing holding them accountable to their actions. This lack of accountability is what gives way to so many scams occurring at this point in the trust chain. For example, as of late 2017, Reuters published that an estimated 980,000 various coins worth up to $15 billion had been stolen over the prior six years. 

Even after establishing trust through all of these layers, you may still be at risk though. Initial Coin Offerings (ICO) are much like IPOs in the stock market. They are a value that is given to a coin before it becomes pubic for people to invest and buy into. Before buying into one of these ICOs, you must first make sure that there aren’t any backdoor deals that have been struck prior to its release either propping up the value beforehand or purposely undervaluing it. 

3.2	Anonymity in Crypto
Coins work off of the assumption that the user is secured and private in the transactions that they make and that their anonymity throughout these transactions is confined only to them. This means that they must be non-identifiable, unreachable, and untraceable throughout the entirety of the transaction. But to many people’s dismay, the usage of a public ledger hinders that layer of anonymity greatly. There are coins that directly combat this main idea and instead opt for creating more secure and private transactions. Coins such as Monero, Dash, Zcash, and Verge all take different approaches in keeping the user completely anonymous and out of the governments eyes [6]. Keeping the user anonymous while also allowing transactions to be made. This visibility and sense of anonymity helps create and establish the trust that people have in a coin. 

4.	Conclusion
There is a layer of trust that is integral to a cryptocurrency’s value, stability, and usability. This Trust intertwines with the security of the user, the ability to keep their identity anonymous, and the decentralization that brings with it protection from government and other bodies. Without the ability to create trust in cryptocurrency there would be no value in it. This is why trust is essential to the usage of cryptocurrencies.  

References
[1] Simon Chandler. Government Tracking of Crypto Is Growing, But There Are Ways to Avoid It. https://cointelegraph.com/news/government-tracking-of-crypto-is-growing-but-there-are-ways-to-avoid-it
[2] Marella, V., Upreti, B., Merikivi, J. et al. Understanding the creation of trust in cryptocurrencies: the case of Bitcoin. Electron Markets (2020). https://doi.org/10.1007/s12525-019-00392-5
[3] Equity Trust. Types of Cryptocurrency Explained. https://www.trustetc.com/blog/cryptocurrency-types/
[4] Study.com. Cryptocurrency: Definition, Creation & Impact. https://study.com/academy/lesson/cryptocurrency-definition-creation-impact.html
[5] Danah Boyd. Surveillance & Society. http://www.danah.org/papers/
[6] Shobhit Seth. The Five Most Private Cryptocurrencies. https://www.investopedia.com/tech/five-most-private-cryptocurrencies/
Rebecca M. Bratspies,Cryptocurrency and the Myth of the Trustless Transaction, 25 Mich.Telecomm.& Tech.L. Rev.1 (2018).
 
